foreign
[Music] ER and today's very exciting video for me
because it's a culmination of quite some years of
interrupted thought so it's a point of view
towards arithmetic and in fact algebra which
is based firmly on a data structure point of
view but it's not sets it's rather multi-sets
so what I'm proposing to do here today is
to create a new framework for arithmetic
with natural numbers first of all
and then with polynomials and then
we'll see that we'll be able to extend this
arithmetic Beyond to more complicated things
and so we're going to end up with a vision of
arithmetic and algebra which is perhaps somewhat
unfamiliar to you and seems to extend in you know
vast new directions so it's really interesting
and if you're interested in exploring this is
a great topic for thinking about and exploring
it turns out that this point of view that I'm
giving you is actually quite parallel in many ways
to what happened in the early days of set theory
when set theory was being used to try to create
a structure for the foundations of mathematics and
the empty set played a very important role then as
it does for us now but the critical difference
is that we are moving away from sets to a more
general approach to data structures so I talk
a lot about the alarm system okay representing
lists order sets multi-sets and sets so for me
sets are just one of these four basic types of
data structures and while a computer scientist is
going to be leaning towards lists as fundamental
objects and that's fine for us we're going to be
thinking about the multi-sets as an unappreciated
kind of framework for thinking about mathematics
which has a lot of potential and a lot of power
and in some ways it's sort of unfortunate
that the history of mathematics circumvented
multi-sets and focused all the attention on
sets okay so in case you haven't watched a
lot of my videos the idea that mathematics is
based on set theory is in my view a complete
distortion of what's really happening okay so
we need to have a much broader point of view and
along with that we need to be much more solid and
we need to be much more explicit we need to focus
on what we can actually write down so forget about
philosophical pronouncements about what happens
when you go to infinity or do an infinite number
of things which you can't actually do so we're
going to be always looking to avoid that kind of
talking which is essentially a kind of vacuous
talking not supported by explicit computation okay
so real number arithmetic is a fantasy as far as
I'm concerned the fundamental theorem of algebra
is just wishful dreaming you could evidence
yourself that by factoring x to the 7 plus x minus
three into quadratic and linear factors just do it
or admit that you can't do it and you'll see
that the fundamental theorem of algebra is not
really true so there's all kinds of really serious
problems with the foundations of mathematics as I
of course talk about very often in this series but
today I want to make a start at another kind of
approach which is in some sense parallel to things
that I've done already I've talked a lot about
marks even from the early days of this series Marx
and anti-marks and so on so this is another point
of view that's sort of parallel sort of competing
has a lot of overlap but is a little bit different
I would like to say also first of all a big
thank you to my Patreon supporters and in
particular benefited by having some reactions to
a previous video that I posted in this direction
and my Patreon supporters especially Lucas
Lufaro gave some interesting suggestions and
encouragement so big shout out to all of
my Patreon supporters okay so what we're
going to do is we're going to use this data
structure point of view to get a new framework
for arithmetic and then ultimately algebra and
everything's based on multi-sets and what is the
multi-set it's a way of collecting things in an
unordered fashion where repetitions are allowed
and I like to think of this as like
boxes this is really box theory
so here is a multi-set okay it's a container okay
I can open up the container let's see what it has
in it okay oh look there's a few things in it uh
there's this plug uh there's a couple of markers
these two markers are pretty well the same these
two red ones so duplicates are allowed okay and
then there's this other thing what is this
um well actually this is another container
okay here's another little container it's a little
plastic container that has a SanDisk drive inside
so it's actually this is like a little box inside
this bigger box and that's a key point right that
we can think about boxes or collections or
multi-sets of multi-sets of multi-sets etc
okay and the containment relations between these
boxes or multi-sets becomes really interesting
okay so we start off at a very simple level
by considering not something complicated like
this but something rather simpler like this an
empty box okay an empty box or an empty multi-set
has the potential to put lots of stuff in
there but currently there's nothing in it
this is going to be our fundamental mathematical
object it's the starting point of our mathematics
okay so we're going to denote it by a pair of
brackets with nothing inside so that's the empty
set or for us better the empty mset because
it has the potential of putting lots of things
inside it we'll give it a name we call it zero
and sometimes in diagrams we'll represent it by
a box or a square like this or a rectangle with
the possibility of putting various stuff in there
so this object just by itself is already a type
we can say we have a type of object zero type
there's only one object that has this type
the empty set or the empty mset or a zero so
this is going to be our starting point and
in some sense we're just going to use this
thing over and over again and put boxes inside
other boxes to create arithmetic and algebra
and we'll be able to go quite far just in this
one lecture as you will see so even if you're
very used to arithmetic in algebra you're going
to be introduced to some exciting new things
in this video okay so the next step up natural
numbers so a natural number is an mset of zeros
the type of natural number denoted Nat that's the
type here's some examples here's an mset of zeros
does it have any zeros in it well it has no
zeros in it but we still consider an empty set
of zeros to be an mset of zeros so that's an
important point let me just talk a little bit
about that okay so here is our as an mset okay
currently it has it's an mset of markers okay
it's an mset of markers if I take one of these
markers out it's still an mset of markers if I
take another marker out well it's still an mset of
markers it happens to be the empty mset of markers
so the empty mcm set is actually or zero is
actually a very flexible object but in particular
it is also a natural number for us so this new
type of object includes the former type zero
okay and then we give these things some names
the obvious ones so the set or mset with just
a single zero in it will be called one the mset
consisting of zero and zero will be called two
and here is three and so on and so forth and
in diagrams if we wanted to represent this
another way maybe simpler for for primary
school kids we could maybe use some other
symbol maybe like small circles to represent
zero so what we usually call 13 then could
be illustrated to a primary school student
by a box or in this case a rectangle with
13 little circles so these little circles
are sort of playing the same role as the
marks these sort of elementary marks that I've
talked about earlier but there is a distinction
because now these basic marks are not sort of
elemental things they are actually empty msets
okay so we have a definition of what a natural
number is it's an mset of zeros so those of
you who have watched a lot of my videos will
know that I like to approach polynomials and
polynomial algebra in terms of what I call poly
numbers which are sort of more data theoretic
and I use these extensively even in the algebraic
calculus course these are sort of workhorses for
for doing algebra so here we're going to introduce
them in a slightly different way but it's really
the same thing as we've already been talking about
but just from a slightly different point of view
so what is a poly number in this context a
poly number is an mset of natural numbers
so we're going one step up further starting with
zero the natural numbers and now poly numbers
and the type poly okay so here is a poly number
why well it's an mset and what does it have in
it one one two those are all numbers so
this is a multi-set of natural numbers
it is therefore a poly number here is another poly
number and okay admittedly there could be a little
bit of confusion depending on how much space you
think there is there this is meant to be 13 okay
uh these are sort of like the adjacent so this
is a a multi-set with just a single number in it
but in particular it's a multi-set of natural
numbers so it's a poly number here's another
poly number because it's an mset of natural
numbers because remember zero is a natural number
the type of natural number included the former
type of zero so zero is a natural number
and in fact this thing here is also a poly number
because it's an mset of natural numbers how many
natural numbers are in here well there aren't any
but it's still an empty mset of natural numbers
so in particular this thing which is of course
zero is also a poly number okay so we have zero
the type zero contained in the type not contained
in the type of poly and now something one level
further which is a little bit fancier okay and it
will take some getting used to you know what this
actually means but it's sort of a natural thing
to do we sort of have this natural hierarchy
now we can just sort of keep on going so a multi
number is by definition an mset of poly numbers
an mset of poly numbers and there's the type multi
okay so look at this thing here there's an mset
what's this comma doing here oh no so here
here's the answer okay here's the mset yes
brackets here and what's inside this mset
well it has this object what is this thing
this is an mset with numbers in it one one
so mset of natural numbers so this is a
poly number here's another poly numbers these
two happen to be equal so this whole thing is
an mset of poly numbers so this is a multi number
here's another multi number it's an mset which
happens to have one poly number in it the poly
number consisting of the multi-set 3 5 and 11.
how about this thing is this an mset of
poly numbers well is zero a poly number
well yes we just said it once see this thing
is zero and this we've said is a poly number
so this is a poly number so this is an mset of
poly numbers in particular it's a multi number
what about the empty set well it's also an mset
of poly numbers the empty mset of poly numbers
so it also includes so again multi includes
poly which includes Nat which includes zero
so we have this inclusion inclusion of types zero
Nat poly multi each included in the other in the
following sense in the sense that if you have an
object of this type then it is automatically an
object also of this type therefore also an object
of this type therefore also an object of this type
and I hope that it's sort of obvious that the
way we're going from one step here to another
is directly generalizable okay we could easily
imagine just keeping on going once we've defined
multi numbers we could define some higher objects
which are msets of multi numbers okay and later
on we're gonna we're gonna be thinking about that
kind of thing but already here we have a very rich
framework for arithmetic and algebra all right but
if we want to have arithmetic we need operations
as well as numbers or objects so there is a
fundamental operation in this world of multi-sets
which is very very general and it's addition okay
so this is the beauty of the multi-set framework
which distinguishes it from the set theory
world in the set theory there's no such thing
as addition of sets but in the multi-set world
there is okay it's crucial to understand and to
appreciate the importance of this operation this
very general operation so how do you add msets you
just combine their contents into a single mset let
me show you physically okay so here are two msets
they're boxes this is a little box that has
a SanDisk in it okay and here this one here
is what does it have in it oh it has two two
markers in it okay shall we add these two msets
add this mset and this mset I'm going to show
you how to do that okay we need another box
okay hey here's here's a box okay so
what am I going to do I'm going to take
this box and this box here these two boxes
and I'm going to combine their contents
one at a time because I only have two hands okay
and there's the there's SanDisk that's also going
in there okay there are the original boxes I don't
need them because I've put everything foreign
everything in this new box and so there I hope
you can see here there's our new box it's got
a SanDisk in it there it is there and it has
our two markers okay that's how you add msets
let's have a look at some examples with
the kinds of objects we've been talking
about okay so here we have some some
objects okay and notice that in this
case I actually have three things okay
and what are these things well these are
um these things are are what well this is a
this is a poly number because it's a multi-set
of natural numbers here's another problem
so this is here this thing here is a multi
number here's another multi number here's another
multi-number but in particular these are msets
so we don't require that we just have two episodes
we could do this with more than two msets we could
have several msets and add them at the same time
just by dumping all their contents into a box
happily things are unordered and repetitions are
allowed so there's no need to fuss around uh and
remove duplicates as you would if you were working
with set theory it's just absolutely simple minded
you just dump them out in the box and there you
go but in particular it's not intrinsically a
binary operation so how do you how do you add
these things well you just get a bigger box
represented by those brackets there and you put
the set three in the mset four the mset 112 the
mset four the zero okay that's also a that's
a natural number okay so in particular it's
a poly number so there's the zero and there
four is there and the one two one is there so
we're just dumping the contents of these three
insets into a single mset that's how you add
okay the operations name will be the usual
addition so if we have you know if this is a
b and c then this sum is denoted a plus b plus
c and note again that it's not intrinsically a
binary operation it applies to all msets it's
not just that we can add numbers right we can
have msets of anything in principle and we're
still able to perform this addition operation
it's really important that you digest the
fundamental aspect of this operation okay this
is something that is so elementary but maybe has
slipped by your consciousness because you're not
used to thinking about msets as being fundamental
but it's a crucial arithmetical structure that's
actually working in the entire world of
msets okay so it's now easy observation that
the natural numbers are closed under
addition in fact one step below that the zero
the zero type is also closed under addition let
me show you that okay so here is now an empty
mset I've dumped everything previously B OMB out
and here's another m the m set okay so suppose
I wanted to add these two msets well I'm going
to get myself another box okay and I'm going to
dump the contents of this one here and also
dump the contents of this one here okay there
I've done it I've dumped all the contents of
the two boxes and you can see it's still empty
okay so empty set plus empty set equals empty set
so zero plus zero equals zero so somewhat less
obvious but still pretty obvious is that if you
have two natural numbers so three plus four say
okay there's a picture of three it's an mset which
has three zeros in it zero zero zero represented
by these little circles because it's a picture
for primary school students and here's a box
representing four you dump them out into another
box well obviously you're gonna get there's the
first three and there's the next four and you're
gonna get what we call seven in terms of the more
familiar notation that we've been talking about
three is actually officially this thing here
's the mset zero zero zero four is the mset zero
zero zero zero we put them all in an amp set so
these guys go here and these guys say go here
and then we can check that that's actually seven
note that poly is also closed under addition
okay here's a poly number because it's an mset of
natural numbers here's another poly number here's
another poly number here's another poly number if
we add all four of them dump the contents dump
the contents dump the contents dump the contents
get three three four zero seven and this empty set
doesn't contribute and this is another multi-set
of natural numbers so it's another poly number
so if we go up one level to multi numbers we
see that also it's closed under addition for
example here's a multi number it's an mset
of poly numbers that's a poly number poly number
here's another mset of poly numbers that's a poly
number that's a polynomial that's a poly number we
add them well obviously we get that one that one
that one that one that one we get another mset of
poly numbers in other words another multi number
okay so we have addition
now we want to go up a step
okay and this really important step we're
going to go from addition to multiplication
okay and it's really important to watch carefully
what I do here it's like magic okay a very simple
kind of magic okay we're going to create
multiplication out of addition so how are
we going to do that so the multiplication of msets
of m's so strictly speaking in the mset world you
need msets of msets to make this work okay as it
turns out all the things that we've been talking
about are in fact msets of msets so strictly
speaking this is not really necessary I just point
this out that if you were working with msets with
other kinds of objects you really want to restrict
yourself to msets of msets but this is not really
a restriction in the world that we set up so far
okay so to multiply msets what you do is you form
the mset of sums of elements one from each mset
so we're going to use addition to define
multiplication okay so look carefully here is an
mset and we're going to assume that the contents A
and B are themselves msets let me remind you that
that is a condition that's automatically satisfied
for all the objects that we've been considering
here's another mset all of its elements are also
msets so we're assuming that okay how are we going
to multiply this mset with this nset we're going
to take pairs in this case because there's two of
them that were multiplying pairs the elements from
this one with elements from this one I'm going to
take this pair and we're going to add them in this
case a plus x we're going to form a plus x this is
an mset that's an mset so a plus x makes sense
that's addition of msets this is another mset
then we're going to take a and y we're going to
add them a plus y take a and z add them get a
plus z take b and x add them get b plus x take
b and y add them you get b plus y take b and z
add them you get b plus z so we're getting
another mset which has new msets in it these
new msets are created from the original two
msets by taking sums of elements one from each
that's how you multiply msets
all right let me illustrate
this multiplication at each of
the levels so at the zero level
zero times zero what do we get well we have to
form an mset which consists of what which consists
of the sum of all entries of this thing with
entries of this thing well there are no entries
of this thing there are no entries of this thing
so there are no possible sums that we can make
so the result is empty fine that's telling
us that 0 times 0 equals zero now let's go
to natural numbers okay which are msets of zero so
there's an mset of zeros there's an mset of zeros
so how are we going to multiply these two
things well we're going to take all possible
combinations entry here entry here or element
here element here okay and we're going to add them
we could add them because the guys inside here are
msets and so they can be added using mset addition
okay so let's do that so this 0 plus this zero
there it is there this zero plus this zero there
it is there this zero plus this zero there it
is there this zero plus this zero there it is
there this zero plus this zero there it is there
this zero plus this zero there it is there have I
done all the pairs yes I've done all the pairs
now we have to evaluate these things what is
zero plus zero well it's zero so each of these is
zero so we get zero zero zero zero zero zero and
in ordinary Hindu Arabic notation we've computed
that two times three is six okay let's go to poly
let's multiply poly numbers so here's a poly
number here's another poly number these are poly
numbers because they're msets of numbers that's
a number that's a number natural numbers here's
another mset of natural numbers so to multiply
them we have to take pairs combinations and add
them so how do you add the number two and the
number one first pair well you get three and
then two plus one is three two plus zero is two
and then three plus one is four three plus one is
four three plus zero is three so we get the mset
three three two four four three it's another mset
of natural numbers so that's another poly number
poly number times poly number equals poly number
and let me show you that this is not restricted to
having two we can multiply in principle a number
of different msets so now I'm going to multiply
three nsets together sort of at the same time
so the mset03 the mset 1 4 the mset 2 7. these are
all poly numbers because they're msets of natural
numbers so what do we need to do well we need to
take combinations where we're taking one element
of each one of these so let's start with the zero
one and two what do I have to do with those things
I have to add them they're msets so the addition
of msets of these three is well defined I don't
have to specify which order we're doing it in
there's three things we're just dumping them out
so zero plus one plus two is three zero plus
one plus seven is eight zero plus four plus
two is six zero plus four plus seven is eleven
okay I have to keep track I'm going to pick
all possible combinations how about three plus
one plus two oh that's six three plus one plus
seven that's eleven three plus four plus two is
nine and three plus four plus seven is fourteen
so we've multiplied these three
poly numbers to get this poly number
okay now one more step up to the multi numbers so
let's do this okay so here's a multi-number why is
this a multi-number well because this thing inside
it is a poly number and here's another poly number
it's a multi-set of natural numbers therefore a
poly number here's another mset of natural numbers
therefore our poly number so this is an mset of
poly numbers here's another mset of poly numbers
note that 2 is indeed a poly number because
we've seen that natural numbers are included
in the type poly numbers so what do we have
to do well we have to take all possible pairs
elements here elements here and we have to add
them okay so let's take this element here and
this element here these are msets there's
an mset there's an mset how do you add them
well we just dump the contents into a box so
we're going to get 0 0 2 1 1. there that's
the result of adding this mset and this mset
how about this mset with two okay well we get
zero zero two what is this thing as an mset
well two is really the mset 0 0. if we want
to write it that way so we could put another two
zeros there now we've added two how about this
thing and this thing well then we're going to
get I better write smaller zero zero two nine
okay and now this one plus this one that's three
eight one one and we also need down here okay
three eight we're adding two so we have to add two
zeros and finally this one here three eight nine
okay and that's the end so
there's the big bracket at the end
so we're getting one two three four five six
just to check okay six different constituents
or elements that makes sense because this one
has two elements this one has three elements so
we should end up getting six elements so we can
do multiplication in each one of these types okay
so a little bit of thought and just doing some
calculations along the lines I've showed you
reveals that each one of these from
type domains zero inside Nat inside
poly inside multi is closed under
both addition and multiplication
and moreover the usual arithmetic laws
that we're familiar with hold namely we
have commutative law a plus b equals
B plus a a times b equals B times a
a plus b plus C equals a plus b plus C that's
an associative law for addition and here's
an associative law for multiplication
and distributive laws a times B plus C
equals a times B plus a times C where we use the
usual convention that the multiplication takes
precedence over the addition that means you have
to do this product first and you do this product
also before you add them together and over here
A plus b times C is a times C plus b times C
okay so it's a great exercise to check these and
sort of convince yourself that these are valid
and you see that it's a very general kind of
arithmetic it's not just arithmetic with numbers
that we're doing here we're doing arithmetic in
a broader context all right so I want to finish
the lecture by clarifying the meaning of poly
and since that's a term that I've already used
quite extensively I want to connect with the
former usage and convince you that these are
pretty well the same things although there
is a slight difference so we can do that by
concentrating on the sort of simplest object when
we're going from natural numbers to poly numbers
which is not itself a natural number so if we
take the set consisting of zero that's a poly
number but it's also a natural number that's
one okay so the simplest poly number which is
not a natural number is this one it's the mset
consisting of a single one let's call it Alpha
okay let's do a bit of arithmetic with this Alpha
suppose we look at Alpha plus Alpha okay which we
could call two alpha what is that well you have to
take this thing and you have to add it with itself
so you have to get a box and you dump
one one in and then you dump another
one in well you're gonna have two ones
in the box so it's gonna look like this
okay what about three Alphas well number one in
dump another one in dump another one in you're
gonna get this thing here and so on so multiples
of outfits clear sort of what they correspond to
how about multiplication suppose we take Alpha
times Alpha so there's Alpha there's Alpha how
do you multiply them well you have to take the
sums of corresponding elements one from each one
of these well there's only one element here and
one element here so you have to take one plus one
and one plus one addition natural numbers
that's two so you're going to get the mset
consisting of a single two and if you take Alpha
cubed that means you're going to multiply this
thing by another one of these then you have to
compute one plus two which is three so you can get
the answer consisting of three so powers of
alpha are sort of naturally corresponding
to those sort of Singleton msets that
just contain a single natural number
and so that allows us to interpret some more
complicated poly like this okay so here's a
more complicated poly number it's an mset of
natural numbers zero zero one one two three
three three so to make sense of this to organize
it a little bit we can write it as a sum so this
is the sum of the mset 0 0 and the mset one one
one and the nset 2 and the mset three three three
three okay what is this thing this is the number
two what is this thing well this is what we've
said is three Alpha what is this thing that's what
we've said is Alpha squared and what is this thing
well Alpha cubed was three so two alpha cubed will
be this plus itself will be the mset three three
and having four of them
that'll be four Alpha cubed
so this is a representation of what an ordinary
algebra we would write as the polynomial 2 plus 3
Alpha plus Alpha squared plus four Alpha cubed
and in my preferred poly number language that
I've talked a lot about in other videos I would
represent this with a list of vertical list like
this okay with the coefficients two three one
four so we're seeing that this sort of form
or definition of a poly agrees with this sort of
new definition of a poly they're really the same
but what's the difference the difference
is that this is a list okay this is a list
and this thing here is of course an mset and
there's a crucial distinction between these
two things that's a really useful to appreciate
so remember when we were looking at polynomials
or poly numbers like this there was a certain
amount of ambiguity because we could add a zero
below here and we agreed that was going to be the
same thing that did not change the poly number
we could add in fact any number of zeros below
and that's not going to change the poly number
even though officially as a list it's kind of
changing there's a little bit of ambiguity there
it's a general rule that when you have
that kind of ambiguity it's because
it's because the list that you're considering is
really more fundamentally to be thought of as a
multiplicity list for an mset okay so this is
an mset of zeros ones twos and threes and since
the natural numbers are naturally ordered zero one
two three we can represent such an absent or maybe
make it more concise by just counting how many
each we have we have two zeros we have three ones
we have one two and we have four threes so this is
a list that is the multiplicity list of this mset
but I would like to suggest to you that actually
formally officially the mset is actually more
fundamental it's at the heart of things and
now we see that this this list object is really
just a secondary object that sort of makes it
easier for us to represent this nset but what
a poly really is is an mset of natural numbers
great so we've accomplished a lot um
of course a question that will be on
your minds is okay but what about these
multi numbers what's their significance
um so I'm going to tell you about that in
the next video and we're also moving towards
an alternate view of this thing which is even more
in spirit for computer scientists so this topic is
going to move really really closely to alignment
with modern computer science as we'll see maybe
mathematics will end up being a topic in computer
science I'm norwalker thanks for listening
[Music]